# Directives

<!-- TOC -->

* [Directives](#directives)
    * [Overview](#overview)
    * [Structural Directives](#structural-directives)
    * [Conditional Display with `*ngIf`](#conditional-display-with-ngif)
    * [Iteration with `*ngFor`](#iteration-with-ngfor)
    * [Switching Templates with `ngSwitch`](#switching-templates-with-ngswitch)
    * [Building Custom Directives](#building-custom-directives)

<!-- TOC -->

## Overview

- Angular directives are HTML attributes that extend the behaviour or
  appearance of a standard HTML element.

- There are three types of directives:
    - _Components_ - directives with an associated template.
    - _Structural directives_ (e.g. `*ngIf` / `*ngFor`) - these add elements
      to or remove elements from the DOM.
    - _Attribute directives_ - these modify the appearance of or define a
      custom behaviour for a DOM element.

- Angular contains a number of built-in directives in `CommonModule`, which
  needs to be imported into our modules.

## Structural Directives

- Names of structural directives conventionally start with a `*`.

- Angular contains the following _structural directives_ by default:
    - `*ngIf` - adds or removes a portion of hte DOM tree based on an
      expression.
    - `*ngFor` - iterates through a list of items and binds each item to a
      template.
    - `ngSwitch` - switches between templates based on a condition.

## Conditional Display with `*ngIf`

- `*ngIf` contains an expression - if this evaluates to `true`, the element
  is inserted into the DOM tree. Otherwise, the element is removed:

    ```html
    <!-- Only added if `name` evaluates to `true` -->
    <div *ngIf="name">
      <h2>Product Details</h2>
      <h3>{{ name }}</h3>
    </div>
    ```

- To display another element if the condition in `*ngIf` evaluates for
  `false`, add an `else localReferenceVariable` statement where
  [`localReferenceVariable`][ref-LocalReferenceVariable] points to an
  alternative `ng-template`:

    ```html
    <!-- Only added if `name` evaluates to `true` -->
    <div *ngIf="name; else noProduct">
      <h2>Product Details</h2>
      <h3>{{ name }}</h3>
    </div>

    <ng-template #noProduct>
      <p>No product selected!</p>
    </ng-template>
    ```

## Iteration with `*ngFor`

- `*ngFor` allows iteration through a collection of items and renders a
  template for each item - the equivalent of a `for` loop for HTML templates.

- Basic syntax contains an expression of the form `let item of items`.
  `item` is then bound within the scope of the directive:

    ```html
    <ul>
      <li *ngFor="let product of products">
        {{ product }}
      </li>
    </ul>
    ```

- The `*ngFor` directive can observe changes in the underlying collection
  and add, remove and sort the rendered templates as items are added,
  removed or reordered.

- We can also set a template input variable using `let variable = property`
  to use the following values:
    - `index` - (0-based) index of the item in the array.
    - `first` / `last` - `boolean` value referencing whether the current
      item is the first or last in the array.
    - `even` / `odd` - `boolean` value indicating whether the item's index
      is even or odd.

- By default, Angular tracks changes to the underlying array using _object
  identity_. Alternatively, we can use a specific property of the items (e.g.
  an identifier) using `trackBy`:

    ```html
    <ul>
      <li *ngFor="let product of products; trackBy: trackByProducts">
        {{product}}
      </li>
    </ul>
    ```

    ```typescript
    export class ProductListComponent {
      trackByProducts(index: number, name: string): string {
        return name;
      }
    }
    ```

## Switching Templates with `ngSwitch`

- The `ngSwitch` directive allows switching between different templates
  based on the value of an expression.

- `ngSwitch` directives consist of three main parts:
    - `[ngSwitch]` - defines the property that we want to switch on.
    - `*ngSwitchCase` - adds or removes a template from the DOM tree
      depending on the value of the property.
    - `*ngSwitchDefault` - applies a default template if none of the other
      `*ngSwitchCase` directives match.

- An example of using the `ngSwitch` directive:

    ```html
    <div [ngSwitch]="name">
      <p *ngSwitchCase="'Webcam'">
        Product is used for video
      </p>
      <p *ngSwitchCase="'Microphone'">
        Product is used for audio
      </p>
      <p *ngSwitchDefault>Product is for general use</p>
    </div>
    ```

## Building Custom Directives

- Custom directives allow advanced custom behaviours to be attached to DOM
  elements.

- If a directive has a template attached, then it becomes a
  [component][ref-Component] - i.e. components are Angular directives with a
  view.

- Directives can be generated by running the `ng generate directive <name>`
  CLI command.

- Directives are TypeScript classes that have the `@Directive` decorator
  applied:
    - The `selector` property defines the CSS selector that works similarly
      to the component selector, but surrounded in square brackets:

        ```typescript
        @Directive({
          selector: '[appCopyright]'
        })
        export class CopyrightDirective {
        }
        ```

    - The directive is used by specifying it (without square brackets) as an
      attribute on an element:

        ```html
        <p appCopyright></p>
        ```

- The custom logic of the directive is contained in its constructor. This
  can take an `ElementRef` to gain access to the element that has the
  directive specified on it:

    ```typescript
    export class CopyrightDirective {
      // `ElementRef` is an Angular service that provides access to the
      // current element - it's injected here.
      constructor(el: ElementRef) {
        const currentYear = new Date().getFullYear();
        const targetEl: HTMLElement = el.nativeElement;
        targetEl.classList.add('copyright');
        targetEl.textContent = `Copyright ©${currentYear} All Rights Reserved.`;
      }
    }
    ```

## Property Binding and Responding to Events

- Angular provides decorators that can be used in directives to provide
  bindings to properties and respond to events in the host element.

- The `@HostBinding` decorator binds a value to the property of the native
  host element. Similar to [property binding][ref-PropertyBinding].

- The `@HostListener` directive binds to an event of the native host element.
  Similar to [event binding][ref-EventBinding].

- Example of `@HostBinding` and `@HostListener`:

    ```typescript
    export class NumericDirective {
      // Binds the `currentClass` property to the `class` property
      // of the input element
      @HostBinding('class') currentClass = '';

      // Binds this method to the `keypress` event on the current element
      @HostListener('keypress', ['$event']) onKeyPress(event: KeyboardEvent) {
        const charCode = event.key.charCodeAt(0);
        if (charCode > 31 && (charCode < 48 || charCode > 57)) {
          this.currentClass = 'invalid';
          event.preventDefault();
        } else {
          this.currentClass = 'valid';
        }
      }
    }
    ```


## Standalone Directives

- By setting the `standalone` property on the `@Directive` directive to `true`,
  it's possible to declare a _standalone directive_.

- They can also be created by running `ng generate directive <name> --standalone`.

- Standalone directives do not belong to a module, but instead need to be
  imported into their usage location in the `imports` property of the
  `@NgModule` that wants to use them.


<!-- References -->
[ref-LocalReferenceVariable]: AngularComponents.md#local-reference-variables-in-templates
[ref-Component]: AngularComponents.md
[ref-PropertyBinding]: AngularComponents.md#property-binding
[ref-EventBinding]: AngularComponents.md#event-binding
